expose devfile validation rules (#96)
devfile/devfile-web: libs/docs/src/docs/no-version/devfile-validation-rules.md

---
title: Devfile Validation Rules

> description: Devfile Validation Rules

Author: Updated

---

> ### Id and Name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Id and name:
```

Author: Updated

`^[a-z0-9]([-a-z0-9]*[a-z0-9])?$`

> The restriction is added to allow easy translation to K8s resource names, and also to have consistent rules for both name and id fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The restriction is added to allow easy translation to K8s resource names, and also to have consistent rules for both `name` and `id` fields.
```

Author: updated

The validation will be done as part of schema validation, the rule will be introduced as a regex in schema definition, any objection of the rule in devfile will result in a failure.

> - limit to lowercase characters i.e., no uppercase allowed
> - limit within 63 characters
> - no special characters allowed except dash(-)
> - start with an alphanumeric character
> - end with an alphanumeric character

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Limit to lowercase characters i.e., no uppercase allowed
- Limit within 63 characters
- No special characters allowed except dash(-)
- Start with an alphanumeric character
- End with an alphanumeric character
```

### Endpoints:

> - all the endpoint names are unique across components
> - endpoint ports must be unique across container components -- two container components cannot have the same target port, but one container component may have two endpoints with the same target port. This restriction does not apply to container components with `dedicatedPod` set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All the endpoint names are unique across components
- Endpoint ports must be unique across `container` components -- two `container` components cannot have the same `targetPort`, but one `container` component may have two endpoints with the same `targetPort`. This restriction does not apply to `container` components with `dedicatedPod` set to `true`.
```

Author: OpenShift

### Commands:

> 1. id must be unique
> 2. composite command:
>     - Should not reference itself via a subcommand
>     - Should not indirectly reference itself via a subcommand which is a composite command
>     - Should reference a valid devfile command
> 3. exec command should: map to a valid container component
> 4. apply command should: map to a valid container/kubernetes/openshift/image component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `id` must be unique
2. `composite` command:
    - Should not reference itself via a subcommand
    - Should not indirectly reference itself via a subcommand which is a `composite` command
    - Should reference a valid devfile command
3. `exec` command should: map to a valid `container` component
4. `apply` command should: map to a valid `container`/`kubernetes`/`openshift`/`image` component
```

Author: OpenShift

5. `{build, run, test, debug, deploy}`, each kind of group can only have one default command associated with it. If there are multiple commands of the same kind without a default, a warning will be displayed.

### Components:
Common rules for all components types:

> - Name must be unique

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `name` must be unique
```

Author: updated

#### Container component 

> 1. the container components must reference a valid volume component if it uses volume mounts, and the volume components are unique
> 2. `PROJECT_SOURCE` or `PROJECTS_ROOT` are reserved environment variables defined under env, cannot be defined again in `env`
> 3. the annotations should not have conflict values for same key, except deployment annotations and service annotations set for a container with `dedicatedPod=true`
> 4. resource requirements, e.g. `cpuLimit`, `cpuRequest`, `memoryLimit`, `memoryRequest`, must be in valid quantity format; and the resource requested must be less than the resource limit (if specified).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The container components must reference a valid volume component if it uses volume mounts, and the volume components are unique
2. `PROJECT_SOURCE` or `PROJECTS_ROOT` are reserved environment variables defined under env, cannot be defined again in `env`
3. The annotations should not have conflict values for same key, except deployment annotations and service annotations set for a container with `dedicatedPod=true`
4. Resource requirements, e.g. `cpuLimit`, `cpuRequest`, `memoryLimit`, `memoryRequest`, must be in valid quantity format; and the resource requested must be less than the resource limit (if specified).
```

Author: Updated

> #### Plugin Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Plugin component
```

Author: Updated

- Commands in plugins components share the same commands validation rules as listed above. Validation occurs after overriding and merging, in flattened devfile
- Registry URL needs to be in valid format

> #### Kubernetes & Openshift component 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Kubernetes & OpenShift component 
```

Author: OpenShift

> - URI needs to be in valid URI format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `uri` needs to be a valid URI format
```

Author: updated

#### Image component 

> - A Dockerfile Image component's git source cannot have more than one remote defined. If checkout remote is mentioned, validate it against the remote configured map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An `image` component's git source cannot have more than one remote defined. If `checkoutFrom.remote` is mentioned, validate it against the remote configured map
```

Author: updated

### Events:

> 1. preStart and postStop events can only be Apply commands
> 2. postStart and preStop events can only be Exec commands
> 3. if preStart and postStop events refer to a composite command, then all containing commands need to be Apply commands.
> 4. if postStart and preStop events refer to a composite command, then all containing commands need to be Exec commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `preStart` and `postStop` events can only be `apply` commands
2. `postStart` and `preStop` events can only be `exec` commands
3. If `preStart` and `postStop` events refer to a composite command, then all containing commands need to be `apply` commands.
4. If `postStart` and `preStop` events refer to a composite command, then all containing commands need to be `exec` commands.
```

Author: Updated

### Parent:
- Share the same validation rules as listed above. Validation occurs after overriding and merging, in flattened devfile

> ### starterProjects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Starter projects:
```

Author: Updated

- Starter project entries cannot have more than one remote defined

> - if checkout remote is mentioned, validate it against the starter project remote configured map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `checkoutFrom.remote` is mentioned, validate it against the starter project remote configured map
```

Author: Updated

> ### projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Projects
```

Author: Updated

> ### projects

Author: Updated

> - if more than one remote is configured, a checkout remote is mandatory
> - if checkout remote is mentioned, validate it against the starter project remote configured map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `checkoutFrom.remote` is mandatory if more than one remote is configured
- If `checkoutFrom.remote` is mentioned, validate it against the starter project remote configured map
```

Author: updated

> - If checkout remote is mentioned, validate it against the starter project remote configured map

Reviewer: > https://github.com/devfile/devfile-web/pull/96#discussion_r1326523795

Might have missed this one if you meant to update it.

Author: updated
